# Predicting Patients Mortality with Acute Myocardial Infarction within 90 Days

Objective – In this project, I work on predicting mortality of patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) within 90 days. The specific goal is to develop a machine learning (ML) pipeline that predicts patients’ mortality using the public dataset named MIMIC-IV. 

Data – The public data called MIMIC-IV (Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care IV) are used for data exploration, analysis and modeling. During data preprocessing, only patients with complete electronic record of AMI cases are included, resulting in a sub-dataset of 9,703 patients. The selected features include patients’ demographic information, comorbidities, lab measurement results and vital signs. The dependent variable is set as a binary value for whether mortality is observed for a patient in a 90-day timeframe.

Method – The full MIMIC-IV data are downloaded from the official website and then loaded into Microsoft SQL Server. Some necessary preprocessing operations, including data retrieval, cleaning and exploration, are implemented based on SQL and R. The selected sub-dataset is exported as a CSV file. Weka 3.8.6 is then employed to build the ML pipeline with the generated small dataset. Five machine learning algorithms – Naïve Bayes, Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Bayes Net and KNN, are employed to build the predictive framework. The dataset is split into 80 and 20 percent for training and testing the models, respectively. In terms of the model performance evaluation, area under ROC, Recall and Precision values are used for each of the five models.

Result – Performance of the five models is evaluated based on multiple metrics. Among the five models, Bayes Net with specific option (e.g., Hill-Climber) offers the largest area under ROC (nearly 0.96) and highest Recall (nearly 0.94). Meanwhile, Random Forest provides the highest Precision value. It is also noted that KNN leads to the lowest Recall, indicating that it is not suitable for the predictive model in this project. 

Conclusion – Generally, Naïve Bayes, Logistic Regression, Random Forest, and Bayes Net algorithms perform well in mortality prediction for patients with AMI within 90 days. Especially, Bayes Net with specific option delivers the largest area under ROC and highest Recall values on the testing data. This study shows a great potential of using ML to build predictive models with applications to the healthcare field. 
